# Warning - Currently unusable
This page is almost a copy and paste from a document made by CESSDA ERIC: their [Software Maturity Levels v1.0](https://drive.google.com/file/d/0Bwk0RK5TDo6iTWxrTXFGSG5tMzg/view).

# CESSDA Software reuse maturity levels
The reuse maturity levels provide guidance on what minimum, expected and excellent standards look like, and will be used to evaluate the products produced by SPs.

### CA1: Documentation
The NASA RRL scale looks at the overall document suite, but it would be both pragmatic and useful to break that down into three: end-user, operational and development documents. That allows phased delivery (and scoring) of documentation. A mean score could be calculated, if required.

#### CA1.1: End-user Documentation
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Partial or no external documentation available; Documentation is insufficient to gain an understanding of the functionality of the software/service even for an experienced user.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* There is external documentation that is accessible and sufficient for an expert user to configure and use the software for the user’s individual needs. Terminology and methodology is not explained.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* There is a user manual that can guide a reasonably skilled user through use and customisation of the software to the user’s individual requirements. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* There are examples of walk-through tutorials, how-to guides, demonstrations of various use case customisations if needed for the user’s individual needs. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* User materials and tutorials can be used as training resources. There is detailed in-software contextual user support documentation. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software. User created documentation and comments form part of the documentation available.

#### CA1.2: Operational Documentation
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Partial or no external documentation available; Documentation is insufficient to gain an understanding for the deployment and configuration of the software without additional technical support or significant investment of time.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* There is external documentation that is accessible and sufficient for an expert to deploy and configure the software for all users. Terminology and methodology is not fully explained. Exception and failure messages are not fully explained.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* There is a deployment and configuration manual that can guide an experienced operational user through deployment, management and configuration of the software. Exception and failure messages are explained, but descriptions of solutions are not available. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* There are examples of walk-through tutorials, demonstrations of various configurations if needed. Exception and failure messages are fully explained, and solutions are documented. Upgrade workflows are fully documented, if needed. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* Documentation is appropriate for different categories of deployment and management of the software. Deployment and configuration demonstrations, materials and tutorials can be used to teach other users. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software. User created documentation and comments form part of the documentation available.
    
#### CA1.3: Development Documentation
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Partial or no external documentation available of the application program interface (API); no, partial or inconsistently commented source code. Documentation is insufficient to gain an understanding of the software/service functionality without significant investment of time.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* There is external documentation that describes public API functionality and is sufficient to be used by an experienced developer. If available, source code is consistently and clearly commented. Source code naming conventions are adhered to and consistent.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* There is external documentation that describes all API functionality, human computer interface (HCI) and code modules, which is sufficient to be used by any developer. An extension guide provides information on how to customise and add to the software, add plug-ins. Internal and external documentation are sufficient to allow an experienced developer to understand program flow and logic with moderate effort.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* There is a guide to the documentation and how to use it. There are examples of how to use the API & HCI for different use cases, and materials & tutorials can be used to train other developers. Documentation is consistent with current version of the software.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* All stages of the software development lifecycle are fully documented, including design, testing and future improvement planning. Documentation is appropriate for different categories of users. Documentation describes the current version of the software. User created documentation and comments form part of the documentation available.

### CA2: Intellectual Property
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Software developers have been identified and their responsibilities have been determined. Relevant policies of developer organisation(s) (or developers) have been reviewed for applicability to intellectual property rights. There maybe evidence of a draft intellectual property rights agreement that would result from cooperative activities with other developer organisations (or developers). Rights are not specified internally in the source code or externally in documentation. Reuse rights or limitations have not been specified.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* Developer organisation(s) (or developers) have an agreement that addresses any potential conflicts in the proposed intellectual property rights and responsibilities for development. A limited rights statement has been drafted, and applied inconsistently in documentation and source code. Developer organisation(s) (or developers) may be contacted to negotiate rights for reuse.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* Agreements on development responsibilities, the list of developers, a recommended citation, and intellectual property rights statements, offering limited rights for reuse, are available, perhaps upon request, for review. Developer organisations(s) (or developers) may be contacted through a single point to obtain formal statements on restricted rights or to negotiate additional rights.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* There is evidence that all developer organisation(s) (or developers) have confirmed that the list of developers, recommended citation, and intellectual property rights statements, including limited rights for reuse, in the software source code, documentation, and in the expression of the software upon execution, conform to their institutional policies and agreements. These include any legal language that has been approved by all parties or their representatives, machine-readable code expressing intellectual property, and concise statements in language that can be understood by laypersons, such as a pre-written, recognisable license. Brief statements are available describing limited rights, restrictions, and conditions for reuse. Developer organisations(s) (or developers) may be contacted through a single point to obtain formal statements on restricted rights or to negotiate additional rights.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* There are multiple statements embedded into the software product describing unrestricted rights and any conditions for reuse, including commercial and non-commercial reuse, and the recommended citation. The list of developers is embedded in the source code of the product, in the documentation, and in the expression of the software upon execution. The intellectual property rights statements are expressed in legal language, machine-readable code, and in concise statements in language that can be understood by laypersons, such as a pre-written, recognisable license.

### CA3: Extensibility
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* The software was not designed with extensibility in mind, so there is either no ability to extend or modify program behavior, or it is very difficult to do, even for usages similar to those of the software core design; execution parameters cannot be changed. There is no, or limited, availability of the source code; the logical flow of code may be hard to follow, with little to no cohesion.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* There is some consideration to extensibility, but that may only exist for a limited number of use cases, through use of methods such as object-oriented design or other tools which provide logical cohesion. Some extensibility is possible through configuration changes; isolation of configuration parameters and constants in clearly identified sections of source code; and/or limited opportunity for software modification. Where source code is available, there is evidence that there is effective use of programming practices designed to enable reuse, such as object oriented design.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* Future extensibility is designed into the system for a moderate range of use cases. The procedures for extending the software are defined, whether by source code modification or through the provision of some type of extension functionality (e.g., callback hooks or scripting capabilities). Where source code modification is part of the extension plan, the software is well-structured, has a moderate to high level of cohesion, and has configuration elements clearly separated from logic and display elements.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* The extensibility capability for the software is well defined, broad range of use cases, providing many points of extensibility. A detailed extensibility plan is publically available and is sufficient to allow an experienced developer to become familiar with the project to extend the software in a reasonable amount of time. Documentation should include clear information about the range of use cases to which the software can be extended as well as potential limitations on expansion. There is evidence that the software has been extended and applied to a context to the original. This extension may have been done by another group or project, using extension documentation, but may have involved ad hoc and substantial assistance from the original development team.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* There is evidence that the software has been extended externally by users outside of the original development group using existing documentation only. There is a clear approach for modifying and extending features across a in multiple scenarios, with specific documentation and features to allow the building of extensions which are used across a range of domains by multiple user groups. There may be a library available of user-generated content for extensions and user generated documentation on extension is also available.


### CA4: Modularity
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* There is evidence that the source code was written with no designs or consideration for organising the code in terms of functionality for modularity or reuse. It may have been a demonstrator or pilot project.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* There is no distinction between generic and solution-specific functionality. The source code is organised into a primary system that provides general functionality and one or two subsystems that each provide multiple, unrelated, functions; code within each module contains many independent logical paths. The architecture is closed with only a few internal functions accessible by external programs through the primary system.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* There is evidence that the architecture is open, with full structuring into individual components that provide functions or services to outside entities (i.e., open architecture); internal functions or services documented, but not consistently; modules have been created for generic functions, but modules have not been created for all of the specified functions; code within each module contains many independent logical paths.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* There is clear organisation of all components into libraries or service registries with consistent documentation of all libraries as APIs or standard web service interfaces. Modules have been created for all specified functions and organised into libraries with consistent features within interfaces, but source code within each module may contain many independent logical paths.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* It is evident that all functions and data are encapsulated into objects or accessible through web service interfaces. There is consistent error handling with meaningful messages and advice, and use of generic extensions to program languages for stronger type checking and compilation-time error checking. Services are available externally and code within each module contains few independent logical paths.


### CA5: Packaging
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Only source code or executable available; i.e. no packaging There is no, or incomplete, installation documentation and no auto-build/installation facility is available. Even an experienced user may have difficulties installing the software.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* Software includes auto-build feature, but is only available for one operating system. Detailed installation instructions are available and building for other operating systems is possible for an experienced user.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* The software is easily configurable for different contexts such as, locations of resources (files, directories, URLs) are configurable. All configuration specific information is centralised.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* On installation there is OS-detect and auto-build for more than one supported platform with OS detection configuration files available along with suite of regression tests for platform-specific testing. Uninstallation is reasonably straightforward with the possibility to remove all created files and configurations.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* A user interface guides the installer through all steps needed to build, configure, and install the software. An uninstaller is also available.


### CA6: Portability
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* The software as a whole is not portable, however, if there is some source code provided with sufficient internal, external and customisation documentation is available then elements may be portable. Executable binaries are provided for a specific platform, but there is no useful information on porting. Porting as a whole is not feasible (e.g. due to licensing) or prohibitively expensive.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* The complete source code is available, without external dependencies that are not portable, but the software cannot be ported without significant changes to the software or the target context. Documentation on porting is insufficient, and should be taken into consideration when assessing the effort required. Cost-benefit and risk analyses, compared to rewriting for the new context and use cases, should be undertaken before porting is considered, and only initiated if the cost benefits of using the software slightly outweigh the cost of developing new software. Porting will nonetheless require significant effort.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* The software is moderately portable. The software can be ported to most major systems without modification or with only relatively small changes necessary to the context or the software itself. Documentation on porting exists and is complete, but requires effort and expertise. Some rudimentary understanding of the underlying software or the target system may be necessary. Any modifications needed to port the software to these systems are well described in the documentation and would be relatively easy to implement.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* The software is highly portable. The software can be ported to all but the most obscure or obsolete systems without modification. The documentation is complete and thorough. No changes to the software are necessary and the effort to port the software is minimal.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* The software is completely portable. The software can be ported to all systems since it runs on an application layer rather than on the underlying operating system layer. Such software is written in languages Java, C#, etc. In theory at least, the software will run on any system in which the appropriate application layer has been installed.


### CA7: Standards Compliance
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* The software and software development process comply, at least in part, with locally defined standards and best practices. The standards may be internally or externally described, but are implemented with modifications to meet local conditions. There may be little or no documented evidence of standards used, but it maybe possible to infer this from the software consistency of functionality and interfaces.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* The software and software development process endeavour to comply with recognised standards or widely used best practices, but without verification or testing and may not be complete. There maybe some documented evidence that standards are used, but it may not be complete.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* The software and software development process comply with open, recognised or proprietary standards, but there is incomplete verification of compliance. Compliance to recognised standards has be tested but this may not be for all components. There is documented evidence of standards being used, but not of the verification of components.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* The software and software development process comply with recognised and proprietary standards. Compliance with these standards has been verified through testing for all components. Documented evidence for selected standards and the verification through testing is available.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* Compliance with open or internationally recognised standards for the software and software development process, is evident and documented, and verified through testing of all components. Ideally independent verification is documented through regular testing and certification from an independent group.

### CA8: Support
Assessment may not be required at this stage. Minimum and expected standard levels to be defined in a future version of this document.

- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* There is known contact information available for the developer organisation(s) and there is a willingness to provide minimal, occasional support without guarantees. It may not be possible for an end-user to use the software without some support.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* The developer organisation(s) respond to reported issues with updates/patches that are usually made available in a reasonably timely fashion. Some support is available, but may be intermittent and without guarantees of continuation. There is evidence of an informal user community that provides answers, for example, via a mailing list or bulletin board. Documentation and source code availability may be sufficient for an experienced user (developer, operations or end-user) to not require extensive support.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* Support is centralised in a website containing relevant resources, answers to FAQ, other useful information and a community support question & answer area (e.g. bulletin or message/discussion board). There is evidence that the developer organisation(s) occasionally engage with users in the community support area. There are regular timetabled releases of updates/patches that are made available and urgent (perhaps due to security issues) update/patches in a timely fashion.There is no opportunity to obtain a support Service Level Agreement (SLA) with the developer(s) or a third party.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* There is organised and clearly defined support by the developer with an email helpdesk and additional documentation such as case studies and other detailed information for a range of user communities (developers, operations staff, and end-users). There is explicit evidence that no continuity of support is implied. It maybe possible to negotiate an SLA for support, but this is not a standard offering of the developer organisation(s).
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* The support by the organisation(s) is clearly defined with frequent and timely updates, releases, etc., responding to the needs of the user communities, as well as consolidation of changes by the community. There is a staffed telephone/email helpdesk available as well as a maintained website. Discussion groups are active and include regular input from the developer(s) and developer organisation(s). There is evidence that continuity of support is implied. Support may be free or fee-based via a support Service Level Agreement (SLA) with the developer(s) or a third party.


### CA9: Verification and Testing
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Software application formulated and unit testing performed. Software application compiles, and executes with known inputs. There is evidence that the requirements may not have been finalised yet, or overall testing of the software determined.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* Software application demonstrated and tested in a controlled ‘laboratory’ context. Testing includes testing for error conditions and handling of unexpected inputs to the application. There is evidence that this level of testing has been incorporated into the build and/or deployment mechanism.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* The software application has been demonstrated, tested and validated in a relevant context. The software application is integrated with existing elements and interfaces so that the total application (component level, subsystem level, and system level) can be tested and validated in a relevant context. At this level operational scenario issues are addressed if applicable.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* Actual software application "qualified" through test and demonstration (meets requirements) and successfully delivered. The software has passed testing and meets all requirements of the software, with the additional testing of the software delivery and installation for various applications. At this level, all issues have been resolved regarding security and operational scenarios.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* Actual software application tested and validated through successful use of application output. There is clear evidence that for any application of the software, testing shows the software meets all defined requirements.


### CA10: Security
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Not all of the security requirements are well understood and not all are addressed during the development phases
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* Necessary security requirements are addressed in the development phase only as part of the software design.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* Security requirements are addressed in the development phases up to and including implementation. Developers have undertaken appropriate security training for software development to a defined security standard.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* Security was addressed in the development phases up to and including verification and testing.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* Security was addressed in the development phases up to and including product release.


### CA11: Internationalisation and Localisation
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:* Internationalisation and localisation are not addressed.
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:* Software is locale aware.
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:* Content to localize is external to source code.
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:* Content to localize (text, layout, graphics and multimedia, keyboard shortcuts, fonts, locale data and character sets, build process) has been internationalized.
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:* Software has been tested with pseudo translations.

## Addition from DARIAH

### CA12: Authentication
- [ ] L1 - *Initial reusability:*
- [ ] L2 - *Reuse is feasible:*
- [ ] L3 - *Reuse is possible by most users:*
- [ ] L4 - *Software is reusable:*
- [ ] L5 - *Demonstrable reusability:*
